## Chapter 1

## Introduction

For several decades, two coding frameworks dominated event data research: Charles McClelland's WEIS [8, 9] and the Conflict and Peace Data Bank (COPDAB) developed by Edward Azar [3, 1, 2]. Both were created during the Cold War and assumed a "Westphalian-Clausewitzian" political world in which sovereign states reacted to each other primarily through official diplomacy and military threats. While innovative when first created, these coding systems are not optimal for dealing with contemporary issues such as ethnic conflict, low-intensity violence, organized criminal activity, and multilateral intervention. McClelland [10, pg. 177] viewed WEIS as only a "first phase"; he certainly did not anticipate that it would continue to be used, with only minor modifications, for four decades.

CAMEO was originally intended merely to support an NSF-funded project on the study of interstate conflict mediation. It was also originally intended to be finished in six months of part-time work. It has, instead, developed as a "next generation" coding scheme designed both to correct some of the long-recognized problems in WEIS and COPDAB, but more importantly, designed both for automated coding and for the detailed coding of sub-state actors. The system was used extensively in the DARPA-funded Integrated Conflict Early Warning System (ICEWS) project [11] and proved surprisingly robust in that environment. Additional detail on the development of the system can be found in

- · http://eventdata.psu.edu/papers.dir/ISA08.pdf
- · http://eventdata.psu.edu/papers.dir/Gerner.APSA.02.pdf

A published version is at [15], and a detailed history of the KEDS project can be found in [13] or http://eventdata.psu.edu/utilities.dir/KEDS.History.0611.pdf .

## 1.0.1 Events

Event categories present in WEIS and COPDAB have both conceptual and practical shortcomings. For instance, WEIS has only a single subcategory for "Military engagement" that must encompass everything from a shot fired at a border patrol to the strategic bombing of cities. COPDAB contains just 16 event categories, spanning a conflict-cooperation continuum that many researchers consider inappropriate. Although there have been efforts to create alternative coding systems-most notably Lengs Behavioral Correlates of War (BCOW) [7]-WEIS and COPDAB remain the predominant frameworks in the published literature.

The lock-in of these early coding systems is readily explained by the time consuming nature of human event coding from paper and microfilm sources. Because human coders typically produce

between five and ten events per hour, and a large data set contains tens of thousands of events, experimental recording is simply not feasible. Established protocols for training and maintaining consistency among coders further constrained efforts to improve WEIS and COPDAB once these were institutionalized. As a consequence, endeavors such as Tomlinson's modification of WEIS [16] and the Global Event Data System (GEDS) project extensions of COPDAB [6] produced only marginal changes.

In contrast to human coding, automated coding allows researchers to experiment with alternative coding rules that reflect a particular theoretical perspective or interest in a specific set of issues. The effort involved in implementing a new or modified coding system, once it has been developed, is relatively small because most of the work can be done within the dictionary of verb phrases. In most cases verb phrases can be unambiguously assigned to appropriate new categories, while obscure phrases are either removed or modified. This elimination of questionable phrases itself represents an improvement in the coding system. Even a long series of texts spanning multiple decades can then be recoded in a few minutes. This allows researchers to focus on maximizing the validity of the coding scheme for their particular research program since the automated coding process itself guarantees the reliability of the system. Consequently in the mid-1990s, the Protocol for the Analysis of Nonviolent Direct Action (PANDA) [4] was developed in an initial experiment with the combination of automated coding and a new ontology focused on sub-state actors, followed by the development of the Integrated Data for Events Analysis (IDEA) [5] system, designed as a super-set of several existing ontologies along with innovations such as the use of tertiary (4-digit) event categories and codes for non-human events such as natural disasters.

In the early stages of the KEDS research, we felt it was important to work with an existing framework so that we could directly compare human-coded and machine-coded data [14]. For a variety of reasons, we selected WEIS, which despite some obvious drawbacks was good enough for our initial analyses. However, we eventually decided to abandon WEIS. Several considerations motivated this choice. First and foremost was our long-standing concern regarding numerous ambiguities, overlaps, and gaps within the WEIS framework. In addition, the distribution of events in WEIS is quite irregular and several of the 2-digit cue categories generate almost no events; we hoped we could improve on this. Third, we wanted to eliminate distinctions among actions that, while analytically discrete, could not be consistently and reliably differentiated using existing news source materials. Finally, as indicated above, the Cold War perspective that permeates WEIS makes it an inappropriate tool for studying contemporary international interactions. Consequently, we developed CAMEO, which is specifically designed to code events relevant to the mediation of violent conflict but can also be used for studying other types of international interactions.

Problems encountered with WEIS are exacerbated due to the lack of a fully specified standard codebook. We based our development of coding dictionaries on the version of the WEIS codebook available through the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) [9] . The section of the codebook dealing with event categories is quite short-about five pages-and provides only limited guidance. Since McClelland never intended that WEIS would become a de facto coding standard, the ICPSR WEIS codebook was meant to be primarily a proof-of-concept.

We initially intended CAMEO to be an extension of WEIS. Consequently, the first phase of the development of CAMEO involved adding cue and subcategories that we found theoretically necessary for the study of mediation and conflict, while keeping most of the WEIS framework intact. The next phase involved looking for examples of each category and writing definitions for the codebook. This process led to the realization that some of the distinctions we wanted to make for theoretical reasons were simply not possible given the nature of the news leads.

For instance, Promise (WEIS 07) is almost indistinguishable from Agree (WEIS 08) unless the word "promise" is used in the sentence. Therefore, we eventually ended up merging the two into

experiment where we looked at a sample of sentences where Tabari had not identified a verb phrase, and this produced a few new candidate phrases, but only a few.

In the long run, it might be possible to re-define the entire CAMEO coding ontology using the standardized WordNet synsets, rather than using the current categories that were developed inductively. This would would again help align the event coding with the larger NLP community, and probably simplify its use in languages other than English.

## 1.0.2 Actors

One of the major changes in the post-Cold War environment has been the emergence of substate actors as major forces in both domestic and international politics. Many have argued that the proliferation of sub-state, non-state, multi-state, and trans-state actors has blurred almost completely the traditional separation of "international" and "comparative" politics. At times these groups exercise coercive force equal to or greater than that of states, whether from within, as in the case of "failed states", or across borders, as with Israel's attempts to control Hizbollah in Lebanon and Hamas in Gaza, or the near irrelevance of borders in many of the conflicts in central and western Africa. Irrespective of the effectiveness of their coercive power, these non-state actors may also be a source of identity that is more important than that of an individual's state-affiliationthe ability of al-Qaeda to attract adherents from across the Islamic world is a good example-or provide examples of strategies that are imitated across borders, as has been seen in the numerous non-violent popular revolutions in Eastern Europe or the more recent "Arab Spring."

Because they were state-centered, WEIS and COPDAB paid relatively little attention to nonstate actors. A small number of long-lived opposition groups that were active in the 1960s such as the Irish Republican Army, the Palestine Liberation Organization, and the National Liberation Front of Vietnam (Viet Cong) were given state-like codes, as were major international organizations such as the United Nations and the International Committee of the Red Cross/Red Crescent. From the perspective of coding, these actors were treated as honorary states. Beyond this small number of special cases, sub- and non-state actors were ignored.

A major breakthrough in the systematic coding of sub-state actors came with the PANDA project [4], which introduced the concept of sub-state "agents"-e.g.media, politicians, labor unionsas part of their standard actor coding. PANDA's primary focus was on contentious politics within states, and consequently needed to distinguish, for example, between police and demonstrators, or between government and opposition political parties.

Unlike PANDA, which coded the entire world, the KEDS project focused specifically on regions that have experienced protracted conflicts. As a consequence, rather than using the PANDA/IDEA of introducing new agent fields, we initially maintained the WEIS/COPDAB convention of using a single "source" and "target" field. However, because the areas we were coding involved quite a few sub-state actors, we eventually developed a series of standard codes that were initially a composite of the WEIS nation-state codes concatenated with PANDA agent codes. Under this system, for example, ISRMIL would be "Israel military", "LIBOPP" would be Liberian opposition parties, "SIEGOV" would be Sierra Leone government and so forth. After realizing that the simple actor-agent model did not accommodate all of the actors we wished to code, we extended this to a more general hierarchical system that was adopted, with modifications, by ICEWS.

Three principles underlie the CAMEO actor coding system. First, codes are composed of one or more three-character elements: In the present system a code can consist of one, two or three of these elements (and therefore three, six, or nine character codes), although this may be extended later. These code elements are classified into a number of broad categories, such as state actors, sub-state actor roles, regions, and ethnic groups.

Second, the codes are interpreted hierarchically: The allowable code in the second element depends on the content of the first element, and the third element depends on the second. This is in contrast to a rectangular coding system, where the second and third elements would always have the same content. The most familiar analogy to a hierarchical coding system is the Library of Congress cataloguing system, where the elements of the catalog number vary-systematically-depending on the nature of the item being catalogued, and consequently may contain very different information despite being part of a single system. The event coding system used in BCOW [7] is another example of a hierarchical scheme in the event data literature.

Third, we are basing our work on standardized codes whenever these are available. This is most obvious in our use of the United Nations nation-state codes (ISO-3166-1 ALPHA 3) ( http://unstats.un.org/unsd/methods/m49/m49alpha.htm ). This contrasts to the Russett-SingerSmall codes [12] used in WEIS, which are specific to the North American quantitative international relations community. We have generally adopted the IDEA agent codes for sub-state actors. We originally used the HURIDOCS ( http://www.huridocs.org/ ) classifications for world religions, but subsequently expanded this to the much more comprehensive and systematic list found in the CAMEO "Religious Classification System." Similarly, we were unable to locate any systematic list of ethnic minority groups, and instead assembled our own from various sources.

Unfortunately, standard codes are generally not available. For example, most IGOs are known by acronyms of varying lengths, so we need to decide how to truncate these to three characters. We spent considerable time trying to determine whether the U.S. government had a standard list of militarized non-state actors; as best we can tell, this does not exist (or at least not in a form we can access), and the situation for ethnic groups is similar.
